# Readme To Understand The Code

## Older Code
The code is divided into two categories:

1. Simulation (Python - runs once)
2. html generators (R - runs concurrently for interactive graphs)

### Simulations
This code is written in python and is designed to run once for each update of the model.

There are two python files of concern - a) regression_model.py and b) model.py. The regression_model is used to calculate weights and to handle polling data, while the model is used to run the total simulations and write the results to a csv.

### html generators
The csv's produced by the simulation code is then handled in two ways. An R markdown code is used to generate histogram and seat changes as html. This only runs once. There is also an interactive shinyapp written in R that runs continuosly and in hosted on shinyapp.io.

## Some Revision
There has been much analysis of the upcoming 2022 United States mid-term elections around public polling. There has been suggestion that the systemic polling errors in 2016 and 2020 could be replicated in this election, especially because the fundamentals predict a clear Republican victory - even a landslide - and but the polls suggest a much narrower election. Given the high unreliability of polling in the modern era, it is clear the priors and fundamentals based forecasts are important to provide some check on the input data.

In the Australian context, changes of government usually occur during periods of economic turmoil. For example, the election of Malcolm Fraser occurred during the high inflation rate crisis of the 1970s. The election of the Hawke government occurred towards the end of the stagflation crisis. The election of the Howard government occurred after the "recession we had to have" and the election of the Rudd government occurred as the daunting scale of the sub-prime mortgage crisis in the United State was becoming felt. The election of the Abbott government came about after Australian debt hit $300 billion. The election of the Albanese government occurred after the covid recession, increasing inflation, and a deteriorating global economy.

But how much of these elections are just "fitting the curve"? The Fraser government was not elected, but appointed after the dismissal of Whitlam and constitutional crisis. Fraser dissolved parliament and campaigned as the incumbent prime minister. Is it possible to say the economic crisis drove the election result, or did the political crises dominate discussion. The election of the Hawke government was called by Fraser in an attempt to prevent Hawke from seeking the leadership of the Labor Party. Hawke was a popular man of the people style figure and campaigned on restoring the medibank levy legistlated by Whitlam, bringing about what's known today as Medicare. Again, is it possible to say that the economic crises at the time was more important than the political circumstances of the day. Similarly, the election of the Howard government came after the longest serving Labor government. Keating's abrasive leadership had succeeded in dismantling John Hewsom but is it possible that Australians simply wanted a kinder style of prime ministerial leadership? The election of Kevin Rudd and the defeat of Howard came before most of the worst effects of the GFC were felt. Indeed, one of the common achieivements ascribed to Rudd and his treasurer, Wayne Swan, was successfully avoiding a recession. Was Howard defeated more because of economics or because of his failure to issue an apology to Indigenous Australians, to tackle climate change as Rudd promised to do, and other policies where the Coalition was seen to be old and weary?

Perhaps the election of the Abbott government best demonstrates how economics are not always likely to be the most important factor in determining election results. As mentioned above the Australian economy had over 2007-2013 had performed stronger than almost any other country. Gillard's minority government had passed important economic reforms including the establishment of parental leave and the NDIS. However, the defeat of her government, technically to Rudd who then lost to Abbott, is usually described as a result of the leadership infighting between Rudd and Gillard. Six years of political chaos and rampant sexism, despite the relative economic prosperity of Australia compared to the rest of the world, resulted in the landslide defeat of the Labor government. However, it was true that national debt was increasing and some economic conditions were worsening. So the question remains how much does the economy determine election results?

The surprise victory of the Coalition in 2019 also has a similar explanation to the the 2013 election. The Coalition campaigned on a budget surplus, typically considered a good economic indicator, but the economy was, in fact, in a per capita recession. Real wages were declining. Morrison was successful in his re-election bid despite this, successfully depicting himself as a caring regular dad style politician and demonising Bill Shorten as politically unpalatable. Clearly in this election many indicators pointed to a declining economic situation, while others pointed to a stronger position, the result was a complete surprise and the return of the Morrison government so unexpected by even the PM himself that he labelled it a "miracle."

Having said that, the 2022 election seems, at least on face value, to be a return to the "it's the economy, stupid!" narrative. The Morrison government had poorly managed the post-pandemic recovery. Inflation was rising quickly and the RBA began an interest rate tightening cycle during the election. Commentators and pundits have said that Albanese's best line was "everything is going up, expect your wages." After the election, the sheer scale of the economic clouds that looms globally and in Australia has only become clearer - perhaps suggesting that the election was even a leading indicator for the economy. But this interpretation misses some very important developments. The rise of the teal independents in response to the Morrison's government perceived structual sexism, rampant corruption and utter failure to act on climate change inflicted huge damage to the Liberal party. What was a narrow victory for Labor, was a catastrophic landslide loss for the Coalition. And despite the further deterioration of the economic circumstance, PM Albanese's approval rating has remained stratospheric - despite increasingly regular claims that the honeymoon is over.

So, how much does the economy matter? This question is complicated. First of all, let's be clear, we are asking how much does the economy effect political circumstances directly. For all the counter-examples above, the economy can tangentially explain why they occurred. The dismissal of Whitlam, for example, was nominally at least due to his poor economic management. The Abbott opposition's main attack line in the 2013 election was on Labor's debt. So the question is about direct economic impact. Secondly, how can we even measure the economy? The way this is typically done by election forecasting models, typically those in the United States, is to state a set of "key indicators." These usually include, unemployment, inflation, recent gdp